# Emergent: personal narrative

## Running

In March 2020, I began running again. At that stage, it had been years since I ran regularly. I used to run track and field in high school, but it did not become a lifelong habit. During this first period of lockdown in response to COVID-19, when schools and creches were closed and we were confined to our home, I discovered was running was the only time during the day that I was uninterrupted and alone. It became the only time I was able to think. As my field hit the pavement in a rhythmic pattern and fuelled by endorphines, I let me my mind wander, crafting webs of ideas. When I got back home, I would jot down everything I could recall, though like a dream, some thoughts were inevitably lost with my exhaled breaths and sweat. Running also helped my psychological state and became a way to process the ongoing stress of the pandemic through my body.

## FitBit

This period of staying close to home -- initially within a 2 kilometer radius -- got me thinking about movement within this sphere, and how my body responded to this constraint. Circling around the house repeatedly, following my two young daughters. I wanted to start counting these steps. I tried to make a pedometer with an Adafruit circuit playground (in order to maintain control over my data), though I was unable to find a way to log the data externally and it kept shutting down due to a battery fault. I ended up just purchasing a FitBit. The model I acquired could also track heart rate. What began as an artistic impetus -- a desire to track my steps and biometric data as a means of documenting this experience -- soon came to influence my running. I found myself running further and faster, making sure to hit my step targets. I set an alert for every hour, so if I had not completed 250 per hours I would be prompted to do so. For a while, I just marched in place to meet these arbitrary targets. My bodily movements were modified in relation to this technical object, a digital device that tracked my movements.

I also noted its inaccuracies. Sometimes while driving for prolonged periods of time, steps would accumulate. If I received an hourly alert, I found I could swing my arm while behind the steering wheel, these movements counted as steps as the car's acceleration combined with my arm's motions were read as such by the accelerometer. 

## Changing Productivity

Once it became clear that working from home would extend into the new academic year, I noticed that my running sessions decreased, as I was no longer able to make time for them due to the demands of online teaching. What had became a significant means of coping with the unknown at this time--my runs became longer and longer as the months progressed and our circles of movement increased--suddenly had to give way to the demands of productivity affiliated with my job as a university lecturer. Sometimes after lecturing online for several hours, I noticed that my FitBit stated I reached my step goals, despite the fact I remained put in my chair. My gesticulations combined with my swivel chair movements were enough for the accelerometer to calculate the motions. One time when I gave a conference paper virtually, my racing heart rate was tracked as exercise for that day. 

The FitBit categorizes activity minutes as lightly active, moderately active, very active, and sedentary. Categories that are interpreted through heart rate data and movements. My very active minutes became my sedentary minutes, as I fed the machine. Becoming machine. Became the machine.

## Sleep Deprivation

Since becoming a mother, I have struggled with sleep deprivation. Lack of sleep has a profound impact, physically and mentally, including an ongoing state of general fatigue and sensation of being ground down amidst the pressures affiliated with maternal responsibilities. 

## *Android Dream*

*Android Dream* is a generative animation where the image changes, colours schemes and opacity, and the soundtrack are created based on a month’s worth of sleep data collected by my Fitbit. A month is selected randomly from the present back to April 2020, when the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent public health restrictions were becoming manifest in the body. The photographic images and colours change in relation to the sleep level (awake, light, deep, and REM), with the opacities mapped to the duration of sleep at that level. The sound frequencies relate to level of sleep and the volume corresponding to the duration. This work is not just visualisations and sonifications of data, but functions as a performance documentation; a divergent means of presenting the combined pressures of sleep deprivation and maternal responsibilities during the pandemic.

## Elevating Emotion and Embodiment

As such, *Emergent* counters the designed intentions of a consumer fitness tracker, opening a critical space that draws from the principles of data feminism, as developed by Lauren Klein and Catherine D'Ignazio (2020). In particular, *Emergent* elevates embodiment and emotion by using biometric data as the impetus for multisensory digital performance, engaging with "knowledge that comes from people as living, feeling bodies in the world" (D'Ignazio and Klein 2020 p. 18). 

The data collected by the FitBit is data of the body; indications and tracking of the body's movements, heartrates, sleep states, and so forth. The device quantifies gestures (both internal and external), creating a lingustic or numeric trace that is read and tracked. It is not only data of the body, but a body of data. There is the potential to read the body through this data, as what Gary Wolf refers to as the "quantified self" (Wolf 2009). The creates a self-image of the body that enables the self to be recognized, but also to communicate the self (Federova 2020); I am able to gain insight into my self through sensors through the ongoing accumulation of data, in turn altering my behaviors in response to insights gained from this data. However, this image not simply dissociated from the body, as "processes perception, recognition, and identification happen at the very material and biological levels of the body" (Fererova 2020 p. 73). Ksenia Federova emphasizes how the body is a meaning-making entity, with new sensing technologies and data processsing enable new means of seeing the potential of the body as such. Engaging with the self-image of the body through it's data is technologically mediated, but also invites different modes of relating to other bodies. The challenge is: how to use technologies as a means of cultivating corporeal connection without dissolving the body into its quantification? 

Despite the fact that it is embodied experience that produces this data, reading them as abstracted numbers does not encapsulate the full experience that produced this information. Numbers in a excel sheet are simply facts. Klein and D'Ignazio warn against the illusions of objectivity that such presentations of data afford. They highlight how data science tends to condemn the use of use data to evoke emotion, with objectivity creating a "space between people and the knowledge they produce" when engaging in statistical work (D'Ignazio and Klein 2020, p. 75-6). However, such presumptions of emotional neutrality is impossible, as even objectivity functions as a kind of rhetorical persuasion, where facts are presented as indisputable truth. In addition, the abstraction of the body through quantification gives the impression that the body can be reduced to static figures, isolating the body from its techno-geographic milieu that is corporeal, dynamic, and more than just numbers in an Excel spreadsheet. Data, instead, can be used to leverage affect--emotions and subjective feelings that produce stimuli for sensory perception, but also enable means of relating to others in ways that exceed quantification. 